

===== PAGE 1 / 8 =====
UGWUDE & UGWUDE: Challenges of Education Management Information Systems on Primary
School Administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State
CHALLENGES OF EDUCATION MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS ON
PRIMARY SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION IN NSUKKA LOCAL GOVERNMENT
EDUCATION AUTHORITY OF ENUGU STATE.
by
UGWUDE, Anthony Chudi (Ph. D)
Department of Education Management and Policy
Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka
and
UGWUDE, Doris Ifeoma (Ph. D)
Department of Early Childhood and Primary Education
Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka
Abstract
The purpose of this study was to determine the role of education management information
systems on primary school administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority
of Enugu State. Three research questions guided the study. The study adopted the descriptive
survey design. The population consisted of all the 1155 public primary school teachers and
134 head teachers from the 134 public primary schools in Nsukka Local Government
Education Authority. Simple random sampling technique by balloting was used to select 10
schools each from the three local education authorities. The sample consisted of 120
respondents comprising of 90 teachers and 30 head teachers. Data were collected using a 30
item questionnaire developed by the researchers and titled: EMIS and Primary School
Administration (EMISPSAQ) Questionnaire. The instrument was validated by three experts.
The reliability of the instrument was determined using Cronbach Alpha. The reliability
coefficient obtained from the three clusters are 0.71, 0.87 and 0.89. The overall reliability
obtained was 0.82. The data collected was analyzed using mean and standard deviation. The
findings of the study revealed that the benefits of Education Management Information System
(EMIS) on primary school administration include; EMIS helps in pupils’ attendance records
and helping in examination management among others. Findings also revealed that lack of
technical support, inadequate user-friendly software for analyzing test results at the school
level, lack of ICT support center and lack of awareness among others are the challenges of
EMIS on primary school administration. Again, the findings of this study showed that
administrators seeking help and involving donors, awareness on the benefit of EMIS and
organizing seminars and conferences on EMIS for teachers and school administrators are the
solutions to the challenges of EMIS on primary school administration. Based on the findings,
the researchers recommended among others that government should help in creating
awareness to school administrators, teachers and the general public on the importance of
EMIS.
Keywords: Computer technology, Information Technology, Information and Communication
Technology, Management Information Systems, Education Management
Information Systems
49

===== PAGE 2 / 8 =====
National Journal of Educational Leadership (NJOEL) Vol. 5 No. 2, 2020 (ISSN: 2251-0303)
Introduction
Computers plays an important role in every field. The computer technology has a deep
impact on education and its advantages include an efficient storage and performance of
information and quick information processing. Scientific and technological progress of the
last few decades has brought not only the economy globalization and worldwide expansion of
technologies but changes in social relations, culture and education. The development of
information technology in the 21st century play important role in education. Information and
communication technology is currently the main source of the powerful technologies used in
the educational institutions around the world (Anderson & Dexter, 2005). With the help of
information and communication technologies, education knowledge access is very easy and
fast. ICT is the technology that is used for information processing, use of electronic
computers, communication devices and software application to convert, store, protect,
process, transmit and retrieve information.
The use of information technology in educational management has rapidly increased due to
its efficiency and effectiveness. School administrators and managers who used to spend large
amount of time in solving complex problems and monitoring the school operations have now
better options due to enhanced technology. Information technologies facilitate the
decentralization of work tasks, allow for greater flexibility and interaction. For these to be
achieved, Management Information System (MIS) becomes necessary. Telem (1999) defines
MIS as an executive information system planned to match the structure, management task,
instructional process and particular needs of the school. According to Obi (2003) MIS is also
relevant in non-progammed decisions as it provides support by supplying information for the
search, the analysis, the evaluation and the choice and implementation process of decision
making. Gehlawat (2014), defines MIS as the term commonly used to refer to the study of
how individuals, groups and organizations evaluate, design, implement, manage and utilize
systems to generate information to improve efficiency and effectiveness of decision making.
According to Moorty (2019), MIS is a decision-making instrument used by top management
comprising of a set of controls.
MIS provides administrators and managers with the information required to manage schools
and organizations efficiently and effectively. MIS are being used by school administrators
and managers to support a range of administrative activities such as financial management,
staff allocation, timetable, attendance monitoring, clocking in and out, reporting, assessment
records and resources. MIS has managed to ease the task of administrators, teachers, staff and
others through a multi-function platform (Syifa, 2019). Also according to the author, the
school system management also manage school’s interaction with the pupils and parents.
This makes the communication between the three parties effective. For effective
administration of the school, Education Management Information Systems (EMIS) becomes
imperative.
EMIS is a web which provides information to key stakeholders in the education sector,
helping them with important data needed to improve education at all levels. Administrators
within the education sector will settle comfortably on the platform with its simple, easy-to-
understand interface and features that adequately equips them for precise human and resource
planning, school mapping and important analytics for quality decision making. Gehlawat
(2014), is of the view that EMIS provides information to manage the institution efficiently
and effectively. They provide an objective system for recording and aggregating information
and supports the institution’s strategic goals and direction. Since EMIS supplies the decision
makers with facts, it supports and enhances the overall decision making process of the school.
50

===== PAGE 3 / 8 =====
UGWUDE & UGWUDE: Challenges of Education Management Information Systems on Primary
School Administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State
According to Balram (2018), EMIS is specially designed to monitor the performance of
education programmes offered by the institute and to manage the distribution and allocation
of educational resources. EMIS is a system for collection, integration, processing,
maintenance, dissemination of data and information to support planning, monitoring and
management at all levels of education system. EMIS is a central data repository capable of
not only gathering, organizing and storing data but also processing and analyzing it and
generating various reports from it (Balram, 2018).
EMIS increases effectiveness and efficiency by saving time and facilities development of
alternative solutions for advanced problems. EMIS have force major changes in school roles
as well as work styles of managers. Also it has changed school management in the areas of
management, choice making, workload, human resources management, communication,
responsibility and planning (Essay UK, 2018). According to Gehlawat (2014), EMIS not only
ease the office work but also ensures the efficient functioning of the schools. The author
further states that EMIS is a more effective way of storage and distribution of information.
Therefore, realization of the importance of EMIS in schools and its successful
implementation is a necessity.
EMIS stores crucial learners’ data such as personal data, examination records and library
details. It also keeps track of the day-to-day progress of learners which is eventually used to
analyze and monitor the improvements or retrogression in pupils over time (Balram, 2018).
Similarly, EMIS are helpful in managing overall functioning of the schools, that is making
programmes more effective, making the teaching process and the changes in learning
environment professional, enabling teachers to exchange their experiences in a more
systematic way, working in teams, determining the needs of the learners (Gurr; Pegler cited
in Gahlawat, 2014). Also, Telem and Buvitski cited in Gahlawat (2014) are of the view that
EMIS helps in supporting the school managers and other staff in doing their duties,
developing their performances, effectiveness and efficiencies. EMIS helps to track attendance
and performance. More importantly, EMIS reduces the workload on teachers’ by providing
quick access to data on any learner or a group of learners which can be drilled-down, filtered
and arranged accordingly within a few clicks (Balram, 2018). Also, according to the author,
EMIS ease tracking and analyzing resources distribution and expenditure. Additionally, the
management can fully control which teacher and staff have access to what kind of data,
looking the learners’ financial records from the other users and also the academic
performance data of the learner can be hinder from the staff.
Managing the school administration has changed with the introduction of EMIS over the last few
years. Earlier, a lot of work was performed manually which resulted in flawed administration.
Currently, schools have started to adopt the EMIS to manage the administration and academic
activities, which is bringing a positive change in the schools. With the numerous benefits of
EMIS in the education system it is still faced with a lot of challenges. Mumtaz; Kirkman, in Shah,
(2014) posits a number of inhibitors to EMIS use as lack of time, lack of training, lack of ICT
resources and lack of staff individual confidence and motivation. Some other barriers for ICT use
in educational management are the lack of data analysis skills among administrators, lack of
training in using ICT-based management tools, and lack of user-friendly software for analyzing
test results at the school level (Carnoy, cited in Shah, 2014). Similarly, Nagar, Rahoo, Rehman
and Arshad (2018), posits that the challenges of EMIS in primary school’s administration are;
schools have no computers and computer laboratory, no internet connections, lack of technical
support, problems regarding qualified computer software experts and schools not be able to
purchase the school management software.
51

===== PAGE 4 / 8 =====
National Journal of Educational Leadership (NJOEL) Vol. 5 No. 2, 2020 (ISSN: 2251-0303)
To succeed in everyday tasks of schools, there is an emerging demand to modernize public
education system with technologies to improve operational, administrative and management
of the institution effectively. Against this backdrop therefore, the researchers sought to
determine the role of EMIS on primary school administration in Nsukka Local Education
Authority.
Statement of the Problem
EMIS is a relatively new concept particularly to those living in remote rural areas and in poor
urban slums where this technology has not fully penetrated. Many of these individuals do not
fully understand the potentials of EMIS. Some of these individuals perceived this new
technology as simply advanced technologies that require a lot of resources and very advanced
skills. Such perception make these people fail to appreciate EMIS as a means of creating
efficiency and cost effective. Lack of awareness on EMIS and negative attitude create
problem. When teacher hear of introduction of e-learning, it generates a lot of issues. Also,
some administrators lack adequate ICT skills, they want to remain the way they are and do
very little with technology. With such category of administrators, development and
implementation of EMIS becomes very challenging. Again, simple technical support is
lacking in schools, because some schools completely lack teachers or workers who possess
simple computer application skills. Issues like installation, operation, maintenance, network
administration and security, (where the EMIS are found) calls for the administrators to look
for experts outside the education field. In such an environment, development and EMIS
implementation is a big challenge.
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this study is to determine the role of EMIS on primary school administration
in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority. Specifically, the study sought to:
1. Determine the benefits of EMIS on primary school administration in Nsukka Local
Government Education Authority of Enugu State.
2. Determine the challenges of EMIS on primary school administration in Nsukka Local
Government Education Authority of Enugu State.
3. Find out the possible solutions to the challenges of EMIS on primary school
administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State.
Research Questions
The following research questions guided the study
1. What are the benefits of EMIS on primary school administration in Nsukka Local
Government Education Authority of Enugu State?
2. What are the challenges of EMIS on primary school administration in Nsukka Local
Government Education Authority of Enugu State?
3. What are the possible solutions to the challenges of EMIS on primary school
administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State?
Method
This study was carried out to determine the role of EMIS on primary school administration in
Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State. Three research questions
guided the study. The study adopted the descriptive survey design. The population consisted
of all the 1155 public primary school teachers and 134 head teachers from the 134 public
primary schools in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority. Nsukka Local
Government Education Authority has three local education authorities namely; Nsukka East,
Nsukka West and Nsukka Central. Simple random sampling techniques by balloting was used
52

===== PAGE 5 / 8 =====
UGWUDE & UGWUDE: Challenges of Education Management Information Systems on Primary
School Administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State
to select 10 schools each from the three local education authorities. Simple random sampling
techniques by balloting was also used to select 30 teachers each from the 10 schools in each
of the three local education authorities. This gives the total sample size of teachers to be 90.
The total sample for this study consisted of 120 respondents comprising of 90 teachers and 30
head teachers from the 10 schools selected each from the three local education authorities.
Data were collected using a 30 item questionnaire developed by the researchers and titled:
EMIS and Primary School Administration (EMISPSAQ) Questionnaire. The instrument was
validated by one MIS expert, one expert in Administration and planning and one expert in
childhood education all from University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
The reliability of the instrument was carried out in Udenu local education authority which
was outside the study area. The reliability of the instrument was determined using Cronbach
Alpha. The reliability coefficient obtained from the three clusters are 0.71, 0.87 and 0.89. The
overall reliability obtained was 0.82. The researchers with the help of one research assistant
administered the questionnaire. 120 copies of the questionnaire were administered to the
respondents. One the spot method was used whereby the questionnaire were administered to
the respondents and was collected immediately after answering the items on the
questionnaire. This is to reduce the rate of loss of questionnaire. The questionnaire
administered were returned at 100% rate. A four-point rating scale of Strongly Agree (SA),
Agree (A), Disagree (D) and Strongly Disagree (SD) weighted 4, 3, 2 and 1 was used to
answer the research questions. Mean and standard deviation was used to analyze the research
questions. Mean response of 2.50 and above were regarded as agreed while those below 2.50
were regarded as disagreed.
Results
Research Question 1: What are the benefits of EMIS on primary school administration in
Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State.
Table 1: Respondents mean and standard deviation rating on the benefits of EMIS on
Primary School administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authorityof
Enugu State.
SN ̅
Benefits of EMIS on primary school administration are 𝑿
SD Remarks
1 EMIS helps in pupils attendance records 2.80 0.91 Agree
2. For easy homework management 2.56 0.86 Agree
3. Helps in examination management. 2.96 1.36 Agree
4. Enables effective communication 2.76 1.05 Agree
5. Ease in pupils admission 3.07 0.86 Agree
6. Efficient staff management 3.13 0.75 Agree
7. Workable inventory management 3.35 0.50 Agree
8. Provides information for informed planning 2.98 1.22 Agree
9. For policy making 2.89 1.07 Agree
10. Efficient decision making 3.24 0.64 Agree
11. Enables human resources management 3.11 0.95 Agree
12. Efficient evaluation of staff performance 2.98 1.22 Agree
13. Reduces work load 3.44 0.50 Agree
Cluster mean 3.03 0.89 Agree
Data in table 1 shows the mean and standard deviation scores on the benefit of EMIS on
primary school administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu
State. The respondents agreed that all the items so listed are the benefits of EMIS. This is
confirmed with the cluster mean of 3.03 with the standard deviation of 0.89.
53

===== PAGE 6 / 8 =====
National Journal of Educational Leadership (NJOEL) Vol. 5 No. 2, 2020 (ISSN: 2251-0303)
Research Question 2: What are the challenges of EMIS on the primary school
administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State.
Table 2: Mean and standard deviation rating on the challenges of EMIS on the primary
school administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authorityof Enugu
State.
SN ̅
Challenges of EMIS on primary school administration are 𝑿
14 Lack of technical support 2.88 0.88 Agree
15 Inadequate user-friendly software for analyzing test results at
2.72 1.45 Agree
the school level
16 Lack of ICT support center 3.33 0.99 Agree
17 Lack of training on data analysis skills among administrators 3.18 0.74 Agree
18 Inadequate training on using ICT based management tools 3.19 0.79 Agree
19 Constant power interruption 3.35 0.62 Agree
20 Insufficient computers 3.14 1.15 Agree
21 Lack of adequate resources 3.09 1.20 Agree
22 Lack of awareness 3.49 0.69 Agree
23 Negative attitudes towards EMIS 3.27 0.70 Agree
24 Cost of computer items 3.45 0.99 Agree
Cluster Mean 3.19 0.92 Agree
SD Remarks
Data in table 2 reveals the challenges of EMIS on primary school administration in Nsukka
Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State. The respondents agreed that all the
items so stated are the challenges of EMIS on primary school administration in Nsukka Local
Government Education Authority of Enugu State. This is confirmed with the cluster mean
score of 3.19 with a standard deviation of 0.92.
Research Question 3: What are the possible solutions to the challenges of EMIS on primary
school administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State?
Table 3: Mean and standard deviation rating on the solutions to the challenges of EMIS
on the primary school administration in Nsukka Local Government Education
Authorityof Enugu State.
S/N Solutions to the challenges of EMIS on the primary school
administration
̅
𝑿
SD Remarks
25 Administrators seeking help and involving donors 26 Awareness on the benefit of EMIS 27 Organizing seminars and conferences on EMIS for teachers and
3.28 0.85 Agree
3.08 0.80 Agree
3.33 0.62 Agree
school administrators
28 Government helping schools in providing alternative power supply 3.15 0.98 Agree
29 Providing competent ICT staff to support the system 3.35 0.69 Agree
30 Training a few of staff on simple technical support 2.93 0.89 Agree
Cluster Mean 3.18 0.80 Agree
Table 3 above shows that the respondents agreed to all the items listed as the solution to the
challenges of EMIS on the primary school administration in Nsukka Local Government
Education Authority of Enugu State. This is confirmed with the cluster mean score of 3.18
with a standard deviation of 0.80.
Discussion
The findings in table I showed that the benefits of EMIS on primary school administration.
The benefits include; EMIS helps in pupils’ attendance records, for easy homework
54

===== PAGE 7 / 8 =====
UGWUDE & UGWUDE: Challenges of Education Management Information Systems on Primary
School Administration in Nsukka Local Government Education Authority of Enugu State
management, helping in examination management, enabling effective communication and
ease in pupils’ admission among others. The findings are in line with that of Gehlawat
(2014), who posits that EMIS not only easy the office work but also ensures the efficient
functioning of the schools. The author further states that EMIS is a more effective way of
storage and distribution of information.
The findings are also in consonance with the study carried out by Balram, (2018), who posits
that EMIS reduces the workload on teachers’ by providing quick access to data on any
learner or a group of learners which can be drilled-down, filtered and arranged accordingly
within a few clicks. Also according to the author, EMIS ease tracking and analyzing
resources distribution and expenditure. Additionally, the management can fully control which
teacher and staff have access to what kind of data, looking the learners’ financial records
from the other users and also the academic performance data of the learner can be hinder
from the staff. The findings on the benefits of EMIS on primary school administration have
implications for the primary school administrators, the primary school management board as
well as the ministry of education to make available the different range of using data records.
The findings in table 2 reveals that lack of technical support, inadequate user-friendly
software for analyzing test results at the school level, lack of ICT support center, lack of
training on data analysis skills among administrators, lack of awareness and cost of computer
items among others are the challenges of EMIS on primary school administration. In
consonance with the above findings, Mumtaz; Kirkman, in Shah (2014), posits a number of
inhibitors to EMIS use as lack of time, lack of training, lack of ICT resources and lack of
staff individual confidence and motivation. Also in agreement with the above findings,
Carnoy, cited in Shah (2014), posits some other barriers for EMIS use in educational
management as; lack of data analysis skills among administrators, lack of training in using
ICT-based management tools, and lack of user-friendly software for analyzing test results at
the school level. Similarly, Nagar, et. al. (2018), posits that the challenges of EMIS in
primary schools’ administration are; schools have no computers and computer laboratory, no
internet connections, lack of technical support, problems regarding qualified computer
software experts and schools not able to purchase the school management software. Findings
on this area of challenges have implication on the primary school administrators, primary
school management board as well as the ministry of education as these are the areas that are
showing the problems encountered for lack of effective use of EMIS in primary school
administration.
Findings in table 3 reveals that administrators seeking help and involving donors, awareness
on the benefit of EMIS and organizing seminars and conferences on EMIS for teachers and
school administrators are some of the possible solutions to the challenges of EMIS on
primary school administration. The findings are in line with that of Mehdi and Jafar (2013),
who posits that the solutions to the challenges of EMIS are creating change in attitude among
managers and administrators, holding suitable conferences to develop the information system
culture, absorbing the efficient and skillful employees and creating suitable motivation for the
stability of the existing employees and holding good training courses and participation of the
administrators and employees. The findings on the solution of EMIS on primary school
administration has implication on primary school administrators, primary school management
board and the ministry of education on the benefits of EMIS and as such monitory and
creating awareness of EMIS activities in primary school to ensure provision and adequate use
of data at all times.
55

===== PAGE 8 / 8 =====
National Journal of Educational Leadership (NJOEL) Vol. 5 No. 2, 2020 (ISSN: 2251-0303)
Conclusion
The findings of this study clearly show that EMIS is essential for effective management and
administration in primary schools. It was also clear that equipment for effective EMIS are
inadequate. The available EMIS equipment are not sufficient to be utilized by teachers,
administrators and administrative staff in primary school. To enhance administrative decision
processes so that decision making, policy analysis, formulating, planning, monitoring and
management at the primary level of education to become a reality, effective EMIS operations
should be adequately available. Some challenges were encountered and these served as the
obstacles to the effective use of EMIS and its utilization at the primary level of education.
Recommendations
Based on the findings, the following recommendations were made:
1. Government should help in creating awareness to school administrators, teachers and
the general public on the importance of EMIS.
2. Government should help in organizing training, seminars and conferences on ICT
matters frequently.
3. Government should help in the procurement of computers and other software that are
used for EMIS as well as employing competent ICT staff who will help in teaching
the administrators and teachers on how to make use of EMIS.
References
Anderson, R.E., & Dexter, S. (2005). School technology leadership: An empirical investigation of
prevalence and effect. Educational Administration Quarterly, 41(1), 49-82
Balram, K. (2018). Role of MIS in education sector. Retrieved from www.iitms.co.in on 20/02/20
Essays, UK. (2018). Management information systems (MIS) in schools. Retrieved 25th February,
2020. From https://www.ukessays.com/essays/education/school-management-information-
systems-in-primary-schools.php?vref=1
Gehlawat, M. (2014). School management information systems: An effective tool for augmenting the
school practices. New Frontiers in Education, 57-64.
Mehdi, B. & Jafar, Baikzad (2013). Management information system: Challenges and solutions.
European Online Journal of National and Social Sciences. 2(3), 374-381. ISSN 1805-3602.
Moorty, S. (2019). The concept of management information systems. Bizfluent.com. retrieved from
https://bizfluent.com. Retrieval date 25/11/2019.
Nagar, M. A. K., Rahoo, L. A., Rehman, H. A. & Arshad, S. (2018). Education management
information system in the primary schools in Sindh a case study of Hyderabad Division. IEEE
5th International Conference on Engineering Technologies and Applied Sciences, 23-
Obi E, (2003). Educational Management: Theory and Practice. Enugu: JAMOE Nigeria Enterprises.
Shah, M. (2014). Impact of management information systems MIS on school administration: What the
literature says. Procedia-Social and Behaviour Sciences 116, 2799-2804.
Syifa, F. (2019). Reasons why school management system is important. Retrieved from www.uk
essays.com/essays/education on 21/02/2020.
Telem, M. (1999). A case of the impact of school administration computerization on the department
head’s role. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 31(4), 385-401.
56