

===== PAGE 1 / 9 =====
12 Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2
ADEQUACY OF INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES
REQUIRED FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF NIGERIA
EDUCATION MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
POLICY IN ANAMBRA STATE.
Carol O. Ezeugbor PhD & Kingsley K.Obiekwe
Department of Educational Management and Policy,
Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka, Anambra State, Nigeria.
Abstract
This paper assessed the adequacy of infrastructural facilities required for the
implementation of Nigeria Education Management Information System
(NEMIS) policy in Anambra state. The study was guided by two research
questions. A descriptive survey research design was adopted for the study.
Two
(NISN) were used. All the 21 NEMIS nodes at the local government level and
1 node at the state level were used for the study. Data were analyzed using
frequency and percentage. Findings indicated that of the nine NEMIS
infrastructural facilities expected to be available at the state and local
government nodes according to FME (2009), only 5 (55.6%) were available at
the state level while none was available at the local government level. Among
the recommendations made was that there is need for the state government to
partner with various non-governmental and international development
partners to be able to meet the challenges of funding and provision of
adequate infrastructural facilities for proper implementation of NEMIS policy.
Introduction
Education is universally recognized as an instrument for social,
political, scientific and technological development. In Nigeria, education is
regarded as an instrument for the promotion of national development as well
as effecting desirable social change (Federal Republic of Nigeria, 2009). This
is the reason why no society can afford to toy with the education of its citizens
as this could result in a snail speed development (Azikiwe, 2010).
Considering the invaluable roles and contribution of education to
meaningful individual, social and national development, its proper
management and administration using an effective and efficient management
information system should be a national concern. High standards of education
in Nigeria call for effective management and administration of the education

===== PAGE 2 / 9 =====
Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2 13
system by collecting, examining and rapid dissemination of information
needed for educational planning and decision making. Education
Management Information System (EMIS) does this by providing necessary
data and information and by fostering an environment in which the demand for
this information drives its use.
EMIS is an organized group of information and documentation
services that collects, stores, processes, analyzes and disseminates information
for educational planning and management (Bernbaum and Moses, 2011). The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO,
2015) stipulated that during the education management process, EMIS should
inform the different actors and partners on the state of the sector, its internal
and external efficacy among others. An EMIS is therefore critical in
facilitating institutional arrangements and strategic planning to ensure access,
equity, quality, rational sourcing and allocation of scarce resources (Federal
Ministry of Education, 2007).
Over the years, EMIS in Nigeria could not perform optimally; data were either
not available or unreliable and could therefore not inform the basis for
planning and decision making (FME, 2007). The data management situation
appeared disorganized as operators in the system had different sets of data for
such indications as enrolment, number of teachers and lots more.
Different agencies and international development partners collected
and used different and discordant sets of data on similar indicators.
The result was that decision making was not evidence based and
similarly no reasonable planning could be done. Moreover, the
nation suffered embarrassments because it could not transmit data
on critical indicators to such world bodies as the UNESCO Institute
of Statistics. (FME, 2007 pp.v).
Acknowledging this, Rufai, (2010) noted that the nation has
consistently suffered embarrassments internationally and from within due to
failure to provide information on education sector. Rufai attributed the
situation to a number of factors among which are inadequate funding, weak
capacity, poor infrastructure, skewed incentives among others. All these
problems appeared to have complicated the data management situation in
Nigeria and perhaps led to confusion and huge gaps in availability of data or
the reliability of available data that is required for educational planning and
decision making.
This dearth of empirical data generated through a functional and
carefully designed system apparently necessitated efforts to put in place the

===== PAGE 3 / 9 =====
14 Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2
Nigeria Education Management Information System (NEMIS) Policy in
December 2007. NEMIS is a database to support the effective management of
the education system at the federal, state and local government levels to
improve the performance of the education system as a whole and of students
in particular (FME, 2007).The policy which decentralized the EMIS process is
meant to enhance efficiency in the collection, management and dissemination
of education information in Nigeria. It is to provide the basis for monitoring
the effectiveness and efficiency of the educational system at all levels. The
approval of the NEMIS Policy was followed by the approval of NEMIS policy
implementation guidelines in 2009 which are intended to provide direction to
the management of education information at different levels of the education
system by specifying the roles of different stakeholders and requirement for
NEMIS right from schools to the federal level.
In decentralizing NEMIS which the policy promotes, all the states are
required to set up, staff and equip education management information system
for their respective states in line with the guidelines. One of the stipulations of
the guideline is that states should make adequate provision of NEMIS
infrastructural requirements. Infrastructure forms basic physical and
organizational structures needed for the smooth operation of a society and
organization or enterprise, or the services and facilities required for an
economy to function effectively. It can be generally defined as the set of
interconnected structural elements that provide framework supporting an
entire structure of development. It is an important term for judging a country
or region's development (Shahi, 2012).
The following basic infrastructural requirements are recommended for each
NEMIS node at the state and local government levels depending on their data
needs according to FME, (2009):
State Level
One mid-range server with up-gradable capacity
Minimum ten (10) computers for statisticians, analysts, programmers and
data inputting.
Three laptops (3) for database managers
Three printers (3) to include a network printer
Photocopier (2 different sizes)
Scanners (2 different sizes)
Internet connectivity with V-Sat facility
24 hour UPS back-up power facility
Strong back-up capability for database to be archived at external location
Local Government Level
One mini server with up-gradable capacity

===== PAGE 4 / 9 =====
Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2 15
Minimum six (6) computers for data inputting
One (1) laptop for database manager/analyst
Two (2) printers to include desk jet printer
Photocopier
Scanner
Internet connectivity with V-Sat facility
24 hour UPS back-up power facility
Strong back-up capability for database to be archived at external
location
It is believed that when these infrastructural facilities are adequately
provided, data for educational planning and decision making will always be
made available. Based on this, the study assessed the adequacy of NEMIS
infrastructural facilities required for the implementation of NEMIS policy in
Anambra State.
The following two research questions guided the study:
1. 2. Are NEMIS infrastructures at the local government nodes Adequate?
Are NEMIS infrastructures at the state node adequate?
Method
The study adopted a descriptive esurvey design. This design, according
to Fraenkel, Wallen and Hyun (2012) seeks to collect and analyse data from
sample of a population in order to determine the current status of that
population with respect of one or more variables. The design was deemed
suitable for this study which collected data in order to determine the adequacy
of NEMIS infrastructural facilities required for the implementation of NEMIS
policy.
The population was 22 consisting of 1 NEMIS node at the state
ministry of education and 21 NEMIS nodes at the 21 local government areas
of the state. These figures were based on records from the Department of
Planning, Research and Statistics, Anambra State Ministry of Education,
Awka (2017). The whole population was used as the study sample.
The researchers made use of two observation checklists titled:
of nine (9) items each meant to tap information on the availability of NEMIS
infrastructures at the 21 local government nodes and at the state node.
The checklists were completed through a direct observation conducted
by the researchers at the state and local government NEMIS nodes located at

===== PAGE 5 / 9 =====
16 Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2
the state Ministry of Education and at the 21 Local Government Area
Headquarters in the state.
Frequency and percentage were used to answer the research questions.
A
infrastructural specifications for each node at the state and local government
level by FME (2009).
Results
Table 1. Percentages on adequacy of NEMIS infrastructures at the local
government nodes
Infrastructures to be provided
at each local government node
according to FME (2009)
Number
expected
at the 21
LGEA
Number
available
%
available Decision
1. Mid-range server with
21 0 0% NA*
upgradable capacity
2. Computers for statisticians,
126 8 6.35% NA
analysts, programmers and
data inputting.
3. Laptop for database
21 0 0% NA
manager/analyst
4. Printers to include a
42 13 30.95% NA
network printer
5. Photocopier 21 1 4.74% NA
6. Scanner 21 0 0% NA
7. Internet connectivity with
V-Sat facility
8. 24 hour UPS back-up
power facility
9. Strong back-up capability
for database to be archived
at external location
21 0 0% NA
21
0
0%
NA
21
0
0%
NA
Key- *NA- Not Adequate
The result presented in table 1 shows that the infrastructural facilities
available at the local government nodes are not adequate in relation to the
specification by FME (2009). The analysis revealed that 1 mid-range server
which is expected to be available at each of the 21 local government node in
the state was not available in any of them. Out of the 126 computers expected

===== PAGE 6 / 9 =====
Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2 17
to be available, only 8 (6.35%) were available. A total of 42 printers were
expected to be available, just 13 (30.95%) were available, 21 photocopiers
were expected to be available at the local government nodes, just 1 (4.74%)
was available. Laptops, scanners, internet connectivity with V-sat facility,
UPS, strong backup facility were not available in any of the 21 local
government nodes.
Table 2. Percentages on adequacy of NEMIS infrastructures at the state
node
Infrastructures to be
provided at each local
government node
according to FME (2009)
Number
expected
Number
Available
%
available
Decision
1. Mid-range server with
1 1 100% A*
upgradable capacity
2. Computers for
10 10 100% A
statisticians, analysts,
programmers and data
inputting.
3. laptop for database
3 3 100% A
manager/analyst
4. Printers to include a
3 2 66.67% NA*
network printer
5. Photocopier 1 1 100% A
6. Scanner 2 1 50% NA
7. Internet connectivity
with V-Sat facility
8. 24 hour UPS back-up
power facility
9. Strong back-up
capability for database
to be archived at
external location
1 1 100% A
1
0
0%
NA
1
0
0%
NA
Key- *A-Adequate, *NA-Not adequate
The analysis of data from the state node displayed in table 2 shows that
infrastructural facilities such as mid-range server with upgradable capacity,
computers, laptops, photocopiers and internet connectivity were available in
line with the specifications by FME (2009). On the other hand, other facilities

===== PAGE 7 / 9 =====
18 Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2
were not available. These include such facilities like printers and scanners
which had percentage availability of 66.6% and 50%; 24 hour UPS backup
and strong back-up capacity for database which were not available at all in the
state node.
Of the nine NEMIS infrastructural facilities expected to be available
according to FME (2009), only 5 (55.6%) were available at the state level
while none was 100% available at the local government level. It was therefore
decided that NEMIS infrastructural facilities were not adequate in Anambra
State.
Discussion
The findings of this study shows that of the nine NEMIS infrastructural
facilities expected to be available according to FME (2009), only 5 (55.6%)
were available at the state level while none was available at the local
government level . It was therefore deduced that NEMIS infrastructural
facilities were not adequate in Anambra State. The reason for this could be as
a result of the low level of funding of the NEMIS policy implementation
process by the state government. It could also be because there is dearth of
dedicated NEMIS nodes as observed by the researchers at the local
government level. The supposed NEMIS data nodes at all the local
government headquarters are embedded within other offices and departments.
This may also have contributed to the inadequacy of NEMIS infrastructural
facilities in the state.
The finding of this study is in line with the findings of Adebola (2007),
who found out that the infrastructural facilities for the successful execution of
the Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme are provided but not
adequate. This finding is supported by Ugwuanyi (2013), who found in his
study that none of the available physical education equipment and supplies in
the schools was adequate.
In addition, Shehu (1996)reported that there was lack of equipment for
instructional physical education in secondary schools in Nigeria. Also
Humbert and Chad (1998) noted that there was lack of appropriate equipment
for physical education classes in schools which constituted a problem. These
findings are not surprising to the researchers because it appears that both the
state and federal government in Nigeria are not doing enough in terms of
funding of education and educational policies. Some government officials in
most cases divert money meant for the procurement of educational facilities
and supplies to other areas of needs.

===== PAGE 8 / 9 =====
Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2 19
Conclusion
The study concludes that the infrastructural facilities required at the
state and local government NEMIS nodes for the implementation of NEMIS
policy are not adequate in Anambra state. Proper funding, supervision and
monitoring by the state government are therefore essential.
Recommendations
1. There is need for the state government to include NEMIS implementation
cost in the annual budgets of concerned departments, ministries and
agencies for them to be able to meet the cost implications of providing
NEMIS facilities.
2. There is also need for the state government to partner with various non-
governmental and international development partners to be able to meet
the challenges of funding and provision of adequate infrastructural
facilities for proper implementation of this policy.
3. The state government also should set up an effective monitoring
mechanism to monitor the NEMIS policy implementation process. When
the implementation process is not funded and monitored, achieving
effective implementation is only but a mirage.
4. There is need for the state government to isolate the NEMIS nodes at the
local levels from other departments for increased efficiency.
Adebola, O. J. (2007). Perceived impact of universal basic education on
national development in Nigeria. International Journal of African &
African American studies, 4(1), 20-36
Azikiwe, V.C. (2010). The state of Nigerian education .The Tribune, p 24.
Bernbaum, M., & Moses, K. (2011).Information systems for education
management .International Journal of Technology for the
Advancement of Knowledge and Learning, 2(3), 47-52.
Federal Ministry of Education.(2007). Nigeria Education Management
Information System Policy.
Federal Ministry of Education.(2009). Implementation Guidelines for the
Nigeria Education Management Information System Policy.
Fraenkel, J.R., Wallen, N. E., & Hyun, H.H., (2012).How to design and
evaluate research in education (8th ed). Boston: McGraw Hill.
Humbert, W.C. and Chad, J. U. (1995).Worldwide Survey on the State and
Status of physical education in schools. McGraw Hill companies.
New York.
Shashi, B. (2012). Impact of Infrastructure Development on Society: A Case
Study of Narayan Municipality, Dailekh. A Thesis Submitted to the

===== PAGE 9 / 9 =====
20 Journal of the Nigerian Academy of Education Vol. 14, No. 2
Central Department of Rural Development in Tribhuvan University,
Kirtipur, Nepal.
Shehu, J. (1996).Implementation of Nigeria secondary school physical
education Curriculum; observations and Suggestions. International
Council for Health Physical Education, Recreation, Sport and Dance
32(2), 15-27
Ugwuanyi, J.I (2013).Availability, adequacy and utilization of physical
education teaching resources in secondary schools in Enugu state. A
Thesis Submitted to the Department of Physical and Health Education,
University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
UNESCO.(2015). Educational Management Information System (EMIS).
Retrieved from
http:lwww.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/planning-and-
managing- education/policy-and-planing/emis/.